---
layout: post
title: "Formal Proof for the K hop Minimum Dominating Set Problem"
date: 2024-12-25
categories: blog
---

<script type="text/javascript" async
    src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.0/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML">
</script>

In computer networks, ensuring security and resilience often requires analyzing how well a network can be monitored, controlled, or disrupted. For example, suppose you want to determine the minimum number of key computers (or nodes) needed to bring down a network by disabling critical machines within a specified range of influence. This problem can also apply to monitoring the spread of information or disease in a social or biological network, where nodes represent individuals or locations, and edges represent interactions.

The **K-hop Minimum Dominating Set (K-MDS)** problem offers a mathematical framework for solving such challenges. By identifying the smallest set of nodes capable of "dominating" all other nodes within a maximum distance of $$K$$ (or hops), we can optimize resources for network surveillance, targeted control, or even attack simulations. The K-MDS problem generalizes the Minimum Dominating Set problem, incorporating the concept of a maximum allowable distance, $$t$$, that a node's influence can span.

# Formal Proof for the K-hop Minimum Dominating Set Problem


Let $$G = (V, E)$$ be a connected graph where $$V$$ is the set of vertices
and $$E$$ is the set of edges. Let $$t$$ be a positive integer representing
the maximum traversal time allowed.

We define the K-Minimum Dominating Set (MDS) problem as follows:

Given graph $$G = (V, E)$$ and a positive integer $$t$$, find a set of
vertices $$S \subseteq V$$ such that for every vertex $$N \in V$$, there
exists at least one vertex $$s \in S$$ such that the distance between $$N$$
and $$s$$ is at most $$t$$.

Formally, the problem can be expressed as finding $$S \subseteq V$$ such
that:
$$
\forall N \in V, \exists s \in S \text{ s.t. } \text{dist}(N, s) \leq t
$$

Where:

-   $$\text{dist}(N, s)$$ denotes the distance between vertices $$N$$ and
    $$s$$ in the graph $$G$$.

-   $$t$$ is the maximum traversal time allowed.

This problem is a general form for the Minimum Dominating Set problem.
We need to minimize the size of $$S$$.

Let us, for the sake of generality, call this the $$t$$-MDS problem.

We prove the NP hardness of this problem using the Minimum Set Cover
problem.

**Minimum Set Cover (MSC)**

**Instance:** A base set $$Q = \{q_1, q_2, \ldots, q_n\}$$, a collection
$$C = \{c_1, c_2, \ldots, c_m\}$$ where $$c_j \subseteq Q$$ for
$$1 \leq j \leq m$$, and an integer $$K \leq m$$.

**Theorem:** $$t$$-MDS is NP-complete.

**Proof:** $$k$$-MDS is in NP, as the answer length is in $$O(n)$$ and the
answer can be verified with a BFS on the graph $$G$$.

To prove NP Hardness, we reduce from the MSC problem.

Consider an instance $$I$$ of the MSC given by the set $$Q$$, the collection
$$C$$, and an integer $$k$$.

An instance $$I'$$ of the $$t$$-MDS consisting of the Graph $$G = (V,E)$$ is
constructed as follows:

1. Let $$V = V_1 \cup V_2 \cup V_3$$, where
$$V_1 = \{v_1, v_2, \ldots, v_n\}$$ (one vertex in $$V_1$$ corresponds to
each element in $$Q$$). 
2. Let $$V_2 = \{w_1, w_2, \ldots, w_m\}$$ (one
vertex in $$V_2$$ corresponds to each set in the collection $$C$$). 
3. Let
$$V_3 = \{p_{ij1}, p_{ij2}, \ldots, p_{ij(t-1)}\}$$, where $$p_{ijk}$$
exists only when $$v_i \in w_j$$. The edges are defined as
$$E = E1 \cup E2 \cup E3 \cup E4$$, where
$$E1 = \{\{v_i, p_{ij1}\} \mid v_i \in w_j\}$$,
$$E2 = \{\{p_{ijk}, p_{ijk+1}\} \mid 1 \leq k \leq t-2\}$$,
$$E3 = \{\{p_{ij(t-1)}, w_j\}\}$$, $$E4 = \{\{w_i, w_j\} \mid i \neq j\}$$.

This construction can be shown to be polynomial, as the new graph has at
most $$m + n + m \times n \times t$$ nodes, i.e., $$O(mnt)$$, similarly for
the edges.

We show that the resulting instance $$I'$$ has a solution if and only if
the instance $$I$$ has a solution.

**Part 1:** Suppose the MSC instance has a cover of size at most $$k$$.

**To prove**: The $$t$$-MDS also has a solution of size at most $$k$$.

**Proof:**

Let $$C' = \{c_1, c_2, c_3, \ldots, c_r\}$$ be the solution for the set
cover problem, where $$r \leq k$$. Consider the set
$$W = \{w_1, w_2, \ldots, w_r\}$$ where $$w_i$$ represents the corresponding
set nodes for the element $$c_i$$. The set $$W$$ is the solution set for the
$$t$$-MDS instance $$I'$$ as follows: For every node $$v$$ in $$V$$:

1.  $$v \in V1$$: Since the set $$C'$$ acts as a cover for each node in
    $$V1$$, there exists at least one set node in $$W$$ containing $$v$$.
    Thus, all nodes of the first type are at a distance $$t$$ from at
    least one node within the graph (due to the way intermediate nodes
    are constructed).

2.  $$v \in V2$$: All nodes in $$V2$$ form a clique, meaning any set of set
    nodes can reach all other set nodes within one time period.

3.  $$v \in V3$$: All the intermediate nodes are at most at a distance of
    $$t-1$$ from the set nodes. For every intermediate node, it either
    lies on the way between an element node ($$V1$$) and a set node
    ($$V2$$), or it doesn't. In the former case, such a node can be
    reached within time $$t$$ by the corresponding set node. In the latter
    case, such a node can be reached within time $$t$$ by traveling first
    to its corresponding set node (this takes 1 time instance) and then
    reaching the node within the remaining $$t-1$$ steps. (Note that an
    intermediate node can be at a maximum distance of $$t-1$$ from a set
    node because of the way the graph is constructed.)

This concludes the proof for part 1.

**Part 2:** Suppose the $$t$$-MDS has a set of size at most $$k$$.

**To prove**: There is a set cover $$C'$$ of size at most $$k$$.

**Proof:** Let the set $$D'$$ represent the dominating set of size
$$r \leq k$$, we can write $$D'$$ as $$D1 \cup D2 \cup D3$$ where $$D_i$$
contains nodes in $$V_i$$.

Then we construct a set $$D$$ such that,

if a node belongs to $$D2$$ (set node) then keep it as it is.

if a node belongs to $$D3$$ then replace it with the closest set node
(note that the intermediate node lies between a set node and an element
node). Basically, if $$p_{ijk}$$ lies in $$D'$$ then replace it with $$w_j$$.

Similarly, if a node belongs to $$D1$$ then we can replace it with any
arbitrary set node that it belongs to. Note that this construction does
not increase the size of the dominating set also; the newly obtained set
$$D$$ is also a dominating set. This is trivial to show, as every node
that is dominated by the intermediate nodes is also dominated by the
corresponding set nodes and we can similarly argue for the element
nodes.

Now, we need to show that the set $$D$$, which contains nodes belonging
only to $$D2$$, also serves as a set cover for the instance $$I$$.

To prove this, we'll employ a proof by contradiction.

Let's assume there exists a node $$v_i$$ that does not belong to the set
cover.

Then, there is no set node in $$D$$ containing $$v_i$$. However, if such a
node doesn't exist, then there would have been no intermediate nodes of
the form $$p_{ijk}$$ in the dominating set $$D'$$. Similarly, there would
have been no set nodes $$w_j$$ containing $$v_i$$, or else $$v_i$$ would be in
the set cover.

This implies that no node within a distance $$t$$ from $$v_i$$ has been
selected, meaning the set $$D'$$ is not a dominating set. But this
contradicts our knowledge that $$D'$$ is a dominating set. Hence, our
assumption must be false.

Thus, there exists no such node $$v_i$$ that does not belong to the set
cover.

Therefore, $$D$$ represents the set cover.

This concludes part 2 as well as the proof for the theorem.